.. _80-build:

Building **whenever**
=====================

**whenever** is being thoroughly tested on Windows and Linux. It should work on Mac too, although
I have no possibility to test it personally. On Windows, the build process is seamless as long as
*Rust* and all its dependencies are installed.

The resulting binaries are generally autosufficient on the destination platform: no extra
libraries, other than the ones provided by the OS itself, are needed to run it from the command
line. Copying the executable file to a directory in the *PATH* or just invoking it using the
full path to the file should be enough to have it up and running.


.. _80-build-scratch:

Building from Scratch
---------------------

In order to build **whenever** a recent version of *Rust* is needed: some of the features that
have been released with version **1.87.0** have been used. Once the *Rust* requirement, along with
the toolchain for the destination platform, is fulfilled, the following build commands produce the
binaries that are normally available in the published releases:

1. on Linux:

.. code-block:: shell

   cargo build --release --no-default-features --features dbus

2. on Windows:

.. code-block:: shell

   cargo build --release --no-default-features --features wmi


This way, the produced binaries will only contain code for features that can be effectively used
on the host platform.


.. _80-build-issues:

Build Issues
------------

On Linux, the build process might complain that some packages are missing: it mainly occurs because
the "essential build tools" and the *development* versions of some packages are not installed by
default. Taking Debian as an example, the following packages must be installed:


* *pkg-config*
* *libx11-dev*
* *libdbus-1-dev*
* *libxss-dev*
* *xscreensaver* (not always necessary).

With these packages installed, the scheduler compiles without errors. However, since not all Linux
distributions come with *Xscreensaver* support (which is used to determine idle time), the related
condition might not be checked and never fire. There is a *DBus* based workaround, that allows to
use :ref:`idle session <50-conditions-idle>` conditions on Linux: the idle time, in this case, is
counted as the amount of seconds after the screen has been locked. To enable this workaround, just
edit the *Cargo.toml* file by uncommenting the second of the following lines:

.. code-block:: toml

   # user-idle has a problem on wayland-based sessions: work around by using
   user-idle = { version = "0.5.3", default-features = false, features = ["dbus"] }  # <-- this line must be uncommented
   # user-idle = "0.5.3"                                                             # <-- this line must be commented

and commenting the line below.
