.. _90-install:

Installation
============

**whenever** does not really need an installation: the binary files that result from the
:ref:`build <80-build>` process are self-contained, and only need to be moved in a directory
mentioned in the *PATH* environment variable, or just to be directly invoked using the full
path to the executable.

Running **whenever** from the command line, though, is not really useful -- if not in order
to test a configuration file, especially if it has not been produced by means of a configuration
utility such as `When`_. The tool, in fact, is designed to be launched by a GUI application, to
hide the console window and to issue appropriate commands to control the scheduler execution.

There are two frontend applications available for **whenever**: the former is minimal, takes only
about 4MB of RAM while running, and does little more than executing the scheduler in background
and giving the user the possibility to stop it gracefully. The latter is a full-featured frontend,
that manages the scheduler configuration, runs it in the background, provides user interaction
with it, and exploits some of the advanced features of **whenever** to provide a more effective
interface and some specific configuration items (tasks, conditions and events) for the platform
it is running on.


.. _90-install-minimal:

Minimal Frontend
----------------

The *minimal* frontend is `whenever_tray`_: the installation procedure is manual, and can be
fulfilled following these steps:

0. on Windows there are no prerequisites, so this step can be skipped. On Linux, some libraries
   might be needed:

   - *wxGTK 3.2* (or later): they should be available most of the times via the system package
     manager, sometimes by adding a third party repository
   - *libxss* and *libX11*, which normally come by installing *Xorg* support.

   Also, enable *app indicators* if needed, using an appropriate *shell extension*.
1. Download the latest binaries ZIP file from the **whenever** releases page (the provided one
   contains both **whenever** and **whenever_tray**) and extract its contents in a directory
   in the system *PATH*.
2. Create the *application data directory* for **whenever_tray** as follows:

   - on Linux: ``mkdir ~/.whenever``
   - on Windows: ``mkdir %APPDATA%\Whenever``
3. Edit *whenever.toml* in the *application data directory*, so that it contains the following
   TOML configuration:

   .. code-block:: toml

    # whenever configuration file
    scheduler_tick_seconds = 5
    randomize_checks_within_ticks = true

    [[task]]
    type = "lua"
    name = "TRACE"
    script = '''
        log.warn("Trace: *** VERIFIED CONDITION *** `" .. whenever_condition .. "`");
        '''

    [[condition]]
    name = "Periodic00"
    type = "interval"
    interval_seconds = 60
    recurring = true
    tasks = [
        "TRACE",
        ]

    # end.
4. in the same *application data directory*, also create the *whenever_tray.toml* file, so that
   it contains what follows:

   .. code-block:: toml

    [whenever_tray]
    # path to the text processor used to view the log file
    #logview_command = 'gnome-text-editor'
    #logview_command = 'gedit'
    #logview_command = 'notepad.exe'

   just uncommenting the appropriate line for a log viewer available on the platform.
5. Launch **whenever_tray**, for example from the command line
6. Access **whenever** from the metronome icon in the notification/tray area.

The *whenever.toml* configuration file should be edited to suit your needs, as the provided
example only logs a line (with *WARN* severity) every minute. Also, you might want to install a
log viewer application to specify as ``logview_command`` in *whenever_tray.toml*, instead of
using generic editor like the ones shown in the example above: for instance, `glogg`_ has been
very useful in my case on both Linux and Windows.


.. _90-install-when:

Complete Frontend
-----------------

At the moment the easiest way to install **whenever** and start using it effectively is through
its full-featured frontend: `When`_. You can follow its specific installation instructions
`here <https://almostearthling.github.io/when-command/install.html>`__: **When** takes care of
downloading and checking the latest binary release of **whenever**, and provides a way to install
the program icons and to autostart the scheduler upon login. Moreover, **When** offers a graphical
UI to configure *tasks*, *conditions*, and *events*, instead of manually editing the configuration
file.


.. _When: https://github.com/almostearthling/when-command

.. _whenever_tray: https://github.com/almostearthling/whenever_tray

.. _glogg: https://glogg.bonnefon.org/
